---
id: "litvis"
narrative-schemas:
  - ../narrative-schemas/feminist
---

@import "assets/robotoStyle.less"

# D’Ignazio and Klein Feminist Data Visualization Example

This example, based on the principles of feminist data visualization proposed by [D’Ignazio and Klein (2016)](http://www.kanarinka.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/IEEE_Feminist_Data_Visualization.pdf) illustrates how approaches not normally exposed during the coding process may be incorporated throughout visualization design and development (which itself is arguably follows several of the design process principles they recommend).

To summarise, D’Ignazio and Klein propose 6 broad principles, each of which prompt a set of _design process questions_ and _design output questions_.
The principles are outlined here forming a type of manifesto and the questions are generated by the schema itself.

1.  **Rethink binaries.** Emphasise representational strategies that are based on multiplicities rather than binary distinctions.
2.  **Embrace pluralism.** Acknowledge the designer's own subject position through self-disclosure encouraging exploration of multiple truths.
3.  **Examine power and aspire to empowerment.** Acknowledge communities of users as a source of knowledge not just a recipient of an interface.
4.  **Consider context.**. Consider how diverse contexts situate knowledge and avoid excluding context through data homogenisation.
5.  **Legitimise embodiment and affect.** Recognise that experience derives from sensation and emotion.
6.  **Make labour visible.** Recognise and expose those who have laboured to generate data and visualization through provenance rhetoric.

---

{( binProcess |} Process response here. {| binProcess )}

{( binOutput |} Output response here. {| binOutput )}

{( pluProcess |} Process response here. {| pluProcess )}

{( pluOutput |} Output response here. {| pluOutput )}

{( powProcess |} Process response here. {| powProcess )}

{( powOutput |} Output response here. {| powOutput )}

{( conProcess |} Process response here. {| conProcess )}

{( conOutput |} Output response here. {| conOutput )}

{( affProcess |} Process response here. {| affProcess )}

{( affOutput |} Output response here. {| affOutput )}

{( labProcess |} Process response here. {| labProcess )}

{( labOutput |} Output response here. {| labOutput )}
